VOTE OF NO CONFIDENCE IN PAPUA NEW GUINEA PARLIMENT
The Papua New Guinea Constitutional Law Review Committee should revisit and review the
18 months Grace Period and vote of No Confidence.
The Grace Period of 18-month period expired and for any successful Motion of Confidence
that was to be moved and passed by Parliament must meet certain stringent requirements;
Currently under the Constitution and what transpired on the Floor of Parliament, the acting
Speaking rejection of the Vote of No Confidence falls within the two categories as explained
by one of our Veteran Constitutional Lawyers and I quote:
1. It does not grant the Prime Minister another 18-month grace period. He would have
another 18 months grace period if he resigned as Prime Minister and got re-elected as
Prime Minister. In the instant case this morning, he did not resign and got re-elected,
but the Vote of Confidence only demonstrated that the Government was intact and
solid.
2. The Vote of Confidence did not invalidate, nullify, or defeat the Motion of No
Confidence that was submitted to the Speaker of Parliament and is pending
deliberations by the Parliamentary Committee.
The Motion of No Confidence will still be moved next week or any time from now on
until 12 months before the next General Election.
The Motion of No Confidence is allowed and provided for by the Constitution of PNG.
It is a constitutional process sanctioned by the Constitution to hold the Executive
Government accountable to the people through their elected representatives in the
National Parliament. This is the constitutional check and balance process in
constitutional democratic governments.
Even if the current and pending Motion of No Confidence is unsuccessful, the
Opposition can still always move some more Motions of No Confidence prior to 12
months before the next general election.
What happened this morning on the floor of Parliament was only a show of the usual
Parliamentary gymnastics and chess games.
*Paul Mawa, LLB, LLM, MBA*
From the above I personally draw an opinion and my Opinion are as Follows:
We should do away with constant unnecessary vote of no confidence in our democracy and
look at measures aim at promoting stability, accountability, and effective governance
Here are some steps that can be taken:
1 .Strengthen the democratic Institutions:
Focus on building robust democratic institutions such as an independent judiciary, a free
press that must be reporting on unbiased factual, a strong civil society reports from all
sectors of the country, that is, from the local level government to provincial government on
all facets of performances acquittal, prudence management of funds on developments
spending and also national government performance, prudent finance management
priorities, equitable sharing, spending, general socioeconomic priorities and management of
the country.
These institutions must be established in all electorates throughout the country and shall
serve as Development and Acquittal Assessors on the performances of all elected leaders.
This process is simply giving powers back to the peoples for filtering performances
processes, and that bipartisan team recommends on individual members performances in its
own electorates to a constitutional Bipartisan Office established on all Vote of No
Confidence. The Bipartisan Team recommends to the Governor General to recommend
through the Office of the Speaker of the National parliament for vote of no confidence on any
democratically formed government after elections and to help prevent unnecessary motion of
no confidence, after the national general election with party have majority number invited by
the Governor General formed government.
2. Promote Transparent Government.
Encourage transparency and accountability in government by implementing measures like
public disclosure of Political Party Funding’s, stricture regulations on lobbying and open-
access to government information’s. This helps reduce the incentives for opportunities and
unnecessary motion of no confidence.
3. Political Party Discipline
Encourage Political Parties to maintain internal discipline by setting clear procedures for
resolving internal conflicts and discouraging MPs from switching parties frequently or
destabilizing the government personal reasons or gains.
4. Constructive Opposition
Encourages Opposition parties to focus on constructive criticisms, rigorous debates and
offering policy alternatives rather than solely seeking to defame and bring down any
legitimate government. Promote Political culture that values collaboration, bipartisan and
consensus-building of our country.
5. Revision of the Electoral System
Consider revising the electoral system to promote greater stability. For instance, adopting a
system that allows for proportional representation or a mixed system of First-past-post and
proportional representation and proportional representation may reduce polarization and
political stability.
6. Recall Mechanisms:
Consider introducing recall mechanisms that allows citizens to hold elected representatives
accountable between elections. This provides an alternative to motions of no confidence, where
constitution can initiate a proceedings to remove an elected official if they have lost confidence in the
performance in their individual electorate, These will decrease the political party numbers, henceforth,
give rise to the office of the Integrity of Political Parties through the office of the Governor General
and request the Speaker of Parliament for Vote of No Confidence in Government. The recall
mechanisms of the members of local level council, presidents, local members of parliament and
governors will make elected officials work closely with people in all tiers of government in service
deliverables as powers being decentralizing power back to the people.
7. Engage in Public Education
Promote civic education and public engagement to enhance citizens understanding of the democratic
principles, political processes, and consequences of the frequent motion of no confidence. This will
and can foster more informed electorate and discourage support for unnecessary motions and power
on recalling of elected officials of each electorate, and its consequential impacts on vote of no
confidence.
8. Encourage Coalition Governments:
Foster culture of coalition building, especially to avoid fragmentation in PNG political landscapes,
Coalition government will promote stability with equitable representation to create stability, peace
cooperation and unity.
It’s important to remember, that in countries like Papua New Guinea with 800 plus different
languages, cultures, norms and beliefs in governing its own territories or electoral boundaries is
hard to find the right balance between stability and accountability complex process, that
requires a thorough understanding of each context and unique challenges.
Therefore, giving power back to each individual electorates in the country to determine performances
of elected officials will minimizes the members crossing floors, leaving political parties and joining
new parties, briberies, nepotisms, unnecessary vote of no confidence, instability in governments and
chaos in managing the real socio-economic issues of the country.
TIN THINK
BOB SIAPE
LAKE KOPIAGO

